README.rst, before:


************
Overview
************

The ``pypdfplot`` package is an extension to ``Matplotlib`` that generates a PDF file of the plot with the generating Python script embedded.

Although ``Matplotlib`` is a very powerful and flexible plotting tool, once a plot is saved as PNG or PDF file, the link between the plot and its generating Python script is lost. The philosophy behind ``pypdfplot`` is that there should be no distinction between the Python script that generates a plot and its output PDF file, much like there is no such distinction in an Origin or Excel file. As far as ``pypdfplot`` is concerned, *the generating script* **is** *the plot.*


The way ``pypdfplot`` works is by extending ``Matplotlib`` with a *publish* function. This function saves the current plot as a PDF file and embeds the generating Python script in that PDF file. The Python script is embedded in such a way that when the PDF file is renamed from .pdf to .py, the file can be read by a Python interpreter without alteration. The script can then be edited at will to implement changes in the plot, after which the script is ran again to produce the updated PDF file of the plot -- including the updated embedded generating script. 

Since the resulting output file is compliant with both Python and PDF syntax, we will call such a file a PyPDF file for the remainder of this document.



************
Installation
************

Via Python Package
==================

Install the package from the PyPI repository opening a command prompt and enter:

.. code:: bash

    pip install pypdfplot


Via Git or Download
===================

Alternatively, the source files can be downloaded directly from the GitHub `repository <https://github.com/dcmvdbekerom/pypdfplot>`__. After downloading the source files, navigate to the project directory and install the package by opening a command prompt and enter:

.. code:: bash

    python setup.py install

************
Quickstart
************

The ``pypdfplot`` package is designed to seamlessly integrate with ``Matplotlib``.
In this section we will go through a basic example that shows how to use ``pypdfplot``.

Simple Example
==============

For this example, our goal is to produce a red plot of the quadratic function from -10 to 20.
To start off, we will first plot this in the conventional way using ``Matplotlib``.

Create a new python file, let's call it ``example.py``. 

Open the file and enter the following script:

.. code:: python

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.show()
	
After running this script, we should get the following figure:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot.png

Next, we will use ``pypdfplot`` to publish this plot as a PyPDF file. 
In order to do this we need to make two changes to the script:

1. Instead of importing *matplotlib.pyplot* we have to import *pypdfplot*. Note that ``pypdfplot`` wraps all ``Matplotlib``'s functions, so by importing *pypdfplot* as *plt* like before, no other modifications to the code are needed.

2. Instead of calling *show()* we have to call *publish()*. Note that *publish()* can take all keywords that *show()* can, in addition to some new keywords (see `Classes`_).

The code now looks as follows:

.. code:: python

    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.publish()

After running this script, if we look in the folder where our ``example.py`` file once was, we notice it has been replaced by a new file ``example.pdf``.
Of course the fact that the ``example.py`` file disappeared doesn't mean the script is gone -- it is now embedded in the PyPDF file ``example.pdf``!

We can find evidence of this by opening the ``example.pdf`` file:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf.png

The table on the left shows all files that are embedded, and clearly ``example.py`` is there.

Most versions of Acrobat reader don't allow the embedded .py file to be opened for security reasons, which is probably a good thing.
To access the python script, rename ``example.pdf`` into ``example.py`` and open the file.
This is what we should find:

.. code:: python

    #%PDF-1.3 23 0 obj << /Type /EmbeddedFile /Length 124 >> stream
    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.publish()
    
    """
    endstream
    endobj
    1 0 obj
    
    <...>
    
    startxref
    8829
    %%EOF
    0000009410 00000 
    """

The first line is the PDF header that helps the PDF reader to determine this is a valid PDF file.
It also includes the object header for the EmbeddedFile object of our ``example.py`` file. 
This line may not be altered, as it will result in corruption of the PyPDF file.

What follows is our original python script, followed by a massive multiline string. 
This multiline string contains all the PDF objects including the data for any remaining embedded files (see `PyPDF File specification`_).
Making any edits in this string will again likely result in corruption of the file, so it is strongly discouraged as well.

In between the first line and the multiline string is our original python script, which may be edited in any way.
For example, let's give the plot a title and change the color to blue:

.. code:: python

    #%PDF-1.3 23 0 obj << /Type /EmbeddedFile /Length 124 >> stream
    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'b')
    plt.title('Blue Example')
    plt.publish()
    
    """
    endstream
    endobj
    1 0 obj
    
    <...>
    
    startxref
    8829
    %%EOF
    0000009410 00000 
    """
	
Again, after running the script the ``example.py`` file is replaced by the ``example.pdf`` file.
When we open ``example.pdf``, we should find the updated blue plot with caption:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf2.png

*publish()* keywords
--------------------
The behaviour of the publish function can be altered through the use of the following keywords. 
Default values are given in brackets.

- **output** (*str*) default = *None* -- Filename of the output file. If *None*, the filename of the python file is used with extension .pdf.

- **in_place** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Whether or not to perform the publication 'in place'. If *True*, the Python file generating the plot will be deleted.
  
- **show_plot** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Whether or not to display the plot after publication.

- **prompt_overwrite** (*bool*) default = *False* -- Wether or not to prompt when the output file already exists and is about to be overwritten. If *False* and the output file does already exist, ``pypdfplot`` will overwrite the file if possible.
  
- **verbose** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Wether or not to show verbose comments during publication.

Embedding Files
===============

In many cases we would like to plot data that is stored in a separate file.
In order for this to work, the external data file must be included in the PyPDF file as well.
What follows is an example how to embed external files with ``pypdfplot``.

We will write a script that opens data from an external excel file and reads the title and axis label from an extrnal text file.

Create an excel file called ``data.xlsx``.
For this example, we will fill the file with the first 10 numbers of the Fibonacci sequence:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/excel_data.png

Then we create a text file with our title and axis labels called ``title.txt``:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/notepad_title.png

Finally, we create a new python file called ``packing.py``. 

As before, let's first have a look at how this script would look using ``Matplotlib``.
We will use ``Pandas`` to import the Excel file into Python.
Open ``packing.py`` and enter the following script:

.. code:: python

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import pandas as pd
    
    df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
    plt.plot(df.x,df.y,'r.')

    with open('title.txt','r') as f:
        title = f.readline()
        xlabel = f.readline()
        ylabel = f.readline()

    plt.title(title)
    plt.xlabel(xlabel)
    plt.ylabel(ylabel)

    plt.show()

After running this script, the following figure should pop up:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot2.png

In order to use ``pyplotpdf`` to publish this as a PyPDF file, we change *matplotlib.pyplot* to *pypdfplot* and *show()* to *publish()* as before.

Additional files can be embedded in the PyPDF file by calling the function *pack(flist)*. The argument *flist* is a list of filenames that are to be embedded.

By setting the keyword *cleanup = True* in the *publish()* function, the local files are deleted after they are successfully embedded in the PyPDF file.

The script now looks as follows:

.. code:: python

    import pypdfplot as plt
    import pandas as pd
    
    df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
    plt.plot(df.x,df.y,'r.')

    with open('title.txt','r') as f:
        title = f.readline()
        xlabel = f.readline()
        ylabel = f.readline()

    plt.title(title)
    plt.xlabel(xlabel)
    plt.ylabel(ylabel)

    plt.pack(['data.xlsx',
              'title.txt'])

    plt.publish(cleanup = True)

After running the script, the output file ``packing.pdf`` is generated and all three files ``packing.py``, ``data.xlsx``, and ``title.txt`` are deleted after being embedded in ``packing.pdf``.
This can be confirmed by opening ``packing.pdf``:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf3.png

To maximize integration with ``Matplotlib``, the PyPDF file is checked for embedded files at the time the ``pypdfplot`` package is imported. If embedded files are found, they are extracted provided there are no local files with the same filename. If a local file is found with the same filename, it is assumed this is a more recent version (e.g. a file that was extracted and then updated), and should therefore have precedence over the embedded file.

In case you want to keep the files that are extracted from the PyPDF file, simply set the keyword *cleanup = False* (or omit).

Editing Embedded Files
======================

There are two ways embedded files can be edited or updated: The Python way or the PDF way. The author encourages editing files via Python, but using PDF should also work.

The Python way
--------------

#) Exctract all embedded files from the PyPDF file by renaming the file to the .py extension, and running the Python script with the *cleanup* keyword function **False** (or omitted).

#) Edit the local file

#) Run again to embed the updated files. If so desired, the *cleanup = True* keyword can be used again to remove all local files.

When ``pypdfplot`` tries to exctract the outdated files from the pypdf file, it will check for local copies. If a local copy is present, it will assume it is a more recent version and will not extract the outdated embedded file.

The PDF way
-----------

#) In the PDF viewer (in most cases, this is Adobe Acrobat), double click on the embedded file you wish to edit to open it. 

#) Edit the file and save it. It will be saved as a local copy in the PDF viewer.

#) Save the PDF file

#) Because the PDF file was saved by a viewer that is unaware of the PyPDF file format, the format is severed. Assuming your filename is ``pdf_file.pdf``, run the following script to convert the PDF file back to PyPDF:

.. code:: python

    from pypdfplot import fix_pypdf
    fix_pypdf('pdf_file.pdf')
    






************************
PyPDF File specification
************************

*This document is work in progress*

The file generated by pypdfplot is both a PDF file and a Python file.
It would be more accurately to describe it as the intersection of both speficifications, i.e. a PyPDF file.

A PyPDF file can come in either Class I or Class II:

Class I
=======
A PyPDF file that is unedited, and therefore compliant with both PDF and Python file specification.

Class II-A
==========
A PyPDF file that has been saved (likely after edits) by a Python editor. It should be expected that the offsets in the xref table and the xrefstart address are not pointing to the right locations anymore. The *filesize* entry in the trailer must still be at the second to last line in order to qualify as Class II-A. It is assumed that only the Python script has been edited, so the offset difference can be retrieved from the difference between the *filesize* entry and the actual filesize.

Class II-B
==========
A PyPDF file that has been saved (possibly after edits) by a PDF writer. The '#' at the start of the file will be absent and the generating script may not appear first in the file anymore and could be encoded. The *filesize* entry will also be absent, but the offsets in xref table will still be correct. This file can therefore not be read by a Python interpreter. The file can be restored to Class I by retrieving its Python script via the /PyFile key in the trailer. This fix can be applied by running *pypdf_fix <filename.pdf>*.

A PyPDF compliant reader must be able to read Class I, Class II-A, and Class II-B files.
A PyPDF compliant writer may only write Class I files.

************
Functions
************

*This document is work in progress*

Description of the functions



************
Classes
************

*This document is work in progress*

Description of the two classes


************
Changelog
************

Here we list all changes

Commit message:

Backend
Started working towards https://github.com/dcmvdbekerom/pypdfplot/issues/18.
savefig saves the PDF but none of the argmuments (other than file_list) are parsed. Also files are not extracted yet at the beginning (e.g. using autoextract)

README.rst, after:


************
Overview
************

The ``pypdfplot`` package is an extension to ``Matplotlib`` that generates a PDF file of the plot with the generating Python script embedded.

Although ``Matplotlib`` is a very powerful and flexible plotting tool, once a plot is saved as PNG or PDF file, the link between the plot and its generating Python script is lost. The philosophy behind ``pypdfplot`` is that there should be no distinction between the Python script that generates a plot and its output PDF file, much like there is no such distinction in an Origin or Excel file. As far as ``pypdfplot`` is concerned, *the generating script* **is** *the plot.*


The way ``pypdfplot`` works is by extending ``Matplotlib`` with a *publish* function. This function saves the current plot as a PDF file and embeds the generating Python script in that PDF file. The Python script is embedded in such a way that when the PDF file is renamed from .pdf to .py, the file can be read by a Python interpreter without alteration. The script can then be edited at will to implement changes in the plot, after which the script is ran again to produce the updated PDF file of the plot -- including the updated embedded generating script. 

Since the resulting output file is compliant with both Python and PDF syntax, we will call such a file a PyPDF file for the remainder of this document.



************
Installation
************

Via Python Package
==================

Install the package from the PyPI repository opening a command prompt and enter:

.. code:: bash

    pip install pypdfplot


Via Git or Download
===================

Alternatively, the source files can be downloaded directly from the GitHub `repository <https://github.com/dcmvdbekerom/pypdfplot>`__. After downloading the source files, navigate to the project directory and install the package by opening a command prompt and enter:

.. code:: bash

    python setup.py install

************
Quickstart
************

The ``pypdfplot`` package is designed to seamlessly integrate with ``Matplotlib``.
This section goes through a basic example that shows how to use ``pypdfplot``.

Simple Example
==============

For this example, the goal is to produce a red plot of the quadratic function from -10 to 20.
To start off, you first plot this in the conventional way using ``Matplotlib``.

Create a new python file, let's call it ``example.py``. 

Open the file and enter the following script:

.. code:: python

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.show()
	
After running this script, you should get the following figure:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot.png

Next, you use ``pypdfplot`` to publish this plot as a PyPDF file. 
In order to do this you need to make two changes to the script:

1. Instead of importing *matplotlib.pyplot* you have to import *pypdfplot*. Note that ``pypdfplot`` wraps all ``Matplotlib``'s functions, so by importing *pypdfplot* as *plt* like before, no other modifications to the code are needed.

2. Instead of calling *show()* you have to call *publish()*. Note that *publish()* can take all keywords that *show()* can, in addition to some new keywords (see `Classes`_).

The code now looks as follows:

.. code:: python

    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.publish()

After running this script, if you look in the folder where the ``example.py`` file once was, you'll notice it has been replaced by a new file ``example.pdf``.
Of course the fact that the ``example.py`` file disappeared doesn't mean the script is gone -- it is now embedded in the PyPDF file ``example.pdf``!

You can find evidence of this by opening the ``example.pdf`` file:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf.png

The table on the left shows all files that are embedded, and clearly ``example.py`` is there.

Most versions of Acrobat reader don't allow the embedded .py file to be opened for security reasons, which is probably a good thing.
To access the python script, rename ``example.pdf`` into ``example.py`` and open the file.
This is what you should find:

.. code:: python

    #%PDF-1.3 23 0 obj << /Type /EmbeddedFile /Length 124 >> stream
    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'r')
    plt.publish()
    
    """
    endstream
    endobj
    1 0 obj
    
    <...>
    
    startxref
    8829
    %%EOF
    0000009410 00000 
    """

The first line is the PDF header that helps the PDF reader to determine this is a valid PDF file.
It also includes the object header for the EmbeddedFile object of our ``example.py`` file. 
This line may not be altered, as it will result in corruption of the PyPDF file.

What follows is our original python script, followed by a massive multiline string. 
This multiline string contains all the PDF objects including the data for any remaining embedded files (see `PyPDF File specification`_).
Making any edits in this string will again likely result in corruption of the file, so it is strongly discouraged as well.

In between the first line and the multiline string is our original python script, which may be edited in any way.
For example, let's give the plot a title and change the color to blue:

.. code:: python

    #%PDF-1.3 23 0 obj << /Type /EmbeddedFile /Length 124 >> stream
    import pypdfplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    
    x = np.arange(-10,20,0.1)
    y = x**2
    
    plt.plot(x,y,'b')
    plt.title('Blue Example')
    plt.publish()
    
    """
    endstream
    endobj
    1 0 obj
    
    <...>
    
    startxref
    8829
    %%EOF
    0000009410 00000 
    """
	
Again, after running the script the ``example.py`` file is replaced by the ``example.pdf`` file.
When you open ``example.pdf``, you should find the updated blue plot with caption:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf2.png

*publish()* keywords
--------------------
The behaviour of the publish function can be altered through the use of the following keywords. 
Default values are given in brackets.

- **output** (*str*) default = *None* -- Filename of the output file. If *None*, the filename of the python file is used with extension .pdf.

- **cleanup** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Whether or not to cleanup files that have been embedded in the PyPDF file. Set to *False* and run script to extract embedded files.
  
- **show_plot** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Whether or not to display the plot after publication.

- **prompt_overwrite** (*bool*) default = *False* -- Wether or not to prompt when the output file already exists and is about to be overwritten. If *False* and the output file does already exist, ``pypdfplot`` will overwrite the file if possible.
  
- **verbose** (*bool*) default = *True* -- Wether or not to show verbose comments during publication.

- **kwargs** -- Any other keyword arguments are passed to matplotlib's *savefig* function.

Embedding Files
===============

In many cases we would like to plot data that is stored in a separate file.
In order for this to work, the external data file must be included in the PyPDF file as well.
What follows is an example how to embed external files with ``pypdfplot``.

We will write a script that opens data from an external excel file and reads the title and axis label from an extrnal text file.

Create an excel file called ``data.xlsx``.
For this example, fill the file with the first 10 numbers of the Fibonacci sequence:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/excel_data.png

Then create a text file with our title and axis labels called ``title.txt``:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/notepad_title.png

Finally, create a new python file called ``packing.py``. 

As before, let's first have a look at how this script would look using ``Matplotlib``.
We will use ``Pandas`` to import the Excel file into Python.
Open ``packing.py`` and enter the following script:

.. code:: python

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import pandas as pd
    
    df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
    plt.plot(df.x,df.y,'r.')

    with open('title.txt','r') as f:
        title = f.readline()
        xlabel = f.readline()
        ylabel = f.readline()

    plt.title(title)
    plt.xlabel(xlabel)
    plt.ylabel(ylabel)

    plt.show()

After running this script, the following figure should pop up:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot2.png

In order to use ``pyplotpdf`` to publish this as a PyPDF file, change *matplotlib.pyplot* to *pypdfplot* and *show()* to *publish()* as before.

Additional files can be embedded in the PyPDF file by calling the function *pack(flist)*. The argument *flist* is a list of filenames that are to be embedded.

By setting the keyword *cleanup = True* in the *publish()* function, the local files will be deleted after they are successfully embedded in the PyPDF file.

The script now looks as follows:

.. code:: python

    import pypdfplot as plt
    import pandas as pd
    
    df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
    plt.plot(df.x,df.y,'r.')

    with open('title.txt','r') as f:
        title = f.readline()
        xlabel = f.readline()
        ylabel = f.readline()

    plt.title(title)
    plt.xlabel(xlabel)
    plt.ylabel(ylabel)

    plt.pack(['data.xlsx',
              'title.txt'])

    plt.publish(cleanup = True)

After running the script, the output file ``packing.pdf`` is generated and all three files ``packing.py``, ``data.xlsx``, and ``title.txt`` are deleted after being embedded in ``packing.pdf``.
This can be confirmed by opening ``packing.pdf``:

.. image:: https://pypdfplot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_images/plot_pdf3.png

To maximize integration with ``Matplotlib``, the PyPDF file is checked for embedded files at the time the ``pypdfplot`` package is imported. If embedded files are found, they are extracted provided there are no local files with the same filename. If a local file is found with the same filename, it is assumed this is a more recent version (e.g. a file that was extracted and then updated), and should therefore have precedence over the embedded file.

In case you want to keep the files that are extracted from the PyPDF file, simply set the keyword *cleanup = False*.

Editing Embedded Files
======================

There are two ways embedded files can be edited or updated: The Python way or the PDF way. Editing files via the Python way is encouraged, but using PDF should also work.

The Python way
--------------

#) Exctract all embedded files from the PyPDF file by renaming the file to the .py extension, and running the Python script with the *cleanup* keyword set to **False**.

#) Edit the local file

#) Run again to embed the updated files. If so desired, the *cleanup = True* keyword can be used again to remove all local files.

When ``pypdfplot`` tries to exctract the outdated files from the pypdf file, it will check for local copies. If a local copy is present, it will assume it is a more recent version and will not extract the outdated embedded file.

The PDF way
-----------

#) In the PDF viewer (in most cases, this is Adobe Acrobat), double click on the embedded file you wish to edit to open it. 

#) Edit the file and save it. It will be saved as a local copy in the PDF viewer.

#) Save the PDF file

#) Because the PDF file was saved by a viewer that is unaware of the PyPDF file format, the format is severed. Assuming your filename is ``pdf_file.pdf``, run the following script to convert the PDF file back to PyPDF:

.. code:: python

    from pypdfplot import fix_pypdf
    fix_pypdf('pdf_file.pdf')
    






************************
PyPDF File specification
************************

*This document is work in progress*

The file generated by pypdfplot is both a PDF file and a Python file.
It would be more accurately to describe it as the intersection of both speficifications, i.e. a PyPDF file.

A PyPDF file can come in either Class I or Class II:

Class I
=======
A PyPDF file that is unedited, and therefore compliant with both PDF and Python file specification.

Class II-A
==========
A PyPDF file that has been saved (likely after edits) by a Python editor. It should be expected that the offsets in the xref table and the xrefstart address are not pointing to the right locations anymore. The *filesize* entry in the trailer must still be at the second to last line in order to qualify as Class II-A. It is assumed that only the Python script has been edited, so the offset difference can be retrieved from the difference between the *filesize* entry and the actual filesize.

Class II-B
==========
A PyPDF file that has been saved (possibly after edits) by a PDF writer. The '#' at the start of the file will be absent and the generating script may not appear first in the file anymore and could be encoded. The *filesize* entry will also be absent, but the offsets in xref table will still be correct. This file can therefore not be read by a Python interpreter. The file can be restored to Class I by retrieving its Python script via the /PyFile key in the trailer. This fix can be applied by running *pypdf_fix <filename.pdf>*.

A PyPDF compliant reader must be able to read Class I, Class II-A, and Class II-B files.
A PyPDF compliant writer may only write Class I files.

************
Functions
************

*This document is work in progress*

Description of the functions



************
Classes
************

*This document is work in progress*

Description of the two classes


************
Changelog
************

Here we list all changes
